The Project Gutenberg eBook of 狂人日記 This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this eBook. Title: 狂人日記 Author: Xun Lu Release date: May 11, 2008 [eBook #25423] Language: Chinese *** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 狂人日記 *** Produced by Zhan-Ru Jiang 一 今天晚上，很好的月光。 我不見他，已是三十多年；今天見了，精神分外爽快。才知道以前的三十多年， 全是發昏；然而須十分小心。不然，那趙家的狗，何以看我兩眼呢？ 我怕得有理。 二 今天全沒月光，我知道不妙。早上小心出門，趙貴翁的眼色便怪：似乎怕我，似 乎想害我。還有七八個人，交頭接耳的議論我，張著嘴，對我笑了一笑；我便從頭直 冷到腳根，曉得他們佈置，都已妥當了。 我可不怕，仍舊走我的路。前面一夥小孩子，也在那裡議論我；眼色也同趙貴翁 一樣，臉色也鐵青。我想我同小孩子有什麼仇，他也這樣。忍不住大聲説，“你告訴 我！”他們可就跑了。 我想：我同趙貴翁有什麼仇，同路上的人又有什麼仇；只有廿年以前，把古久先 生的陳年流水簿子，踹了一腳，古久先生很不高興。趙貴翁雖然不認識他，一定也聽 到風聲，代抱不平；約定路上的人，同我作冤對。但是小孩子呢？那時候，他們還沒 有出世，何以今天也睜著怪眼睛，似乎怕我，似乎想害我。這真教我怕，教我納罕而 且傷心。 我明白了。這是他們娘老子教的！ 三 晚上總是睡不著。凡事須得研究，才會明白。 他們——也有給知縣打枷過的，也有給紳士掌過嘴的，也有衙役佔了他妻子的， 也有老子娘被債主逼死的；他們那時候的臉色，全沒有昨天這麼怕，也沒有這麼凶。 最奇怪的是昨天街上的那個女人，打他兒子，嘴裡説道，“老子呀！我要咬你幾 口才出氣！”他眼睛卻看著我。我出了一驚，遮掩不住；那青面獠牙的一夥人，便都 哄笑起來。陳老五趕上前，硬把我拖回家中了。 拖我回家，家裡的人都裝作不認識我；他們的臉色，也全同別人一樣。進了書房 ，便反扣上門，宛然是關了一隻雞鴨。這一件事，越教我猜不出底細。 前幾天，狼子村的佃戶來告荒，對我大哥説，他們村裡的一個大惡人，給大家打 死了；幾個人便挖出他的心肝來，用油煎炒了吃，可以壯壯膽子。我插了一句嘴，佃 戶和大哥便都看我幾眼。今天才曉得他們的眼光，全同外面的那夥人一模一樣。 想起來，我從頂上直冷到腳跟。 他們會吃人，就未必不會吃我。 你看那女人“咬你幾口”的話，和一夥青面獠牙人的笑，和前天佃戶的話，明明 是暗號。我看出他話中全是毒，笑中全是刀。他們的牙齒，全是白厲厲的排著，這就 是吃人的傢夥。 照我自己想，雖然不是惡人，自從踹了古家的簿子，可就難説了。他們似乎別有 心思，我全猜不出。況且他們一翻臉，便説人是惡人。我還記得大哥教我做論，無論 怎樣好人，翻他幾句，他便打上幾個圈；原諒壞人幾句，他便説“翻天妙手，與眾不 同”。我那裡猜得到他們的心思，究竟怎樣；況且是要吃的時候。 凡事總須研究，才會明白。古來時常吃人，我也還記得，可是不甚清楚。我翻開 歷史一查，這歷史沒有年代，歪歪斜斜的每頁上都寫著“仁義道德”幾個字。我橫豎 睡不著，仔細看了半夜，才從字縫裡看出字來，滿本都寫著兩個字是“吃人”！ 書上寫著這許多字，佃戶説了這許多話，卻都笑吟吟的睜著怪眼看我。 我也是人，他們想要吃我了！ 四 早上，我靜坐了一會兒。陳老五送進飯來，一碗菜，一碗蒸魚；這魚的眼睛，白 而且硬，張著嘴，同那一夥想吃人的人一樣。吃了幾筷，滑溜溜的不知是魚是人，便 把他兜肚連腸的吐出。 我説“老五，對大哥説，我悶得慌，想到園裡走走。”老五不答應，走了；停一 會，可就來開了門。 我也不動，研究他們如何擺佈我；知道他們一定不肯放鬆。果然！我大哥引了一 個老頭子，慢慢走來；他滿眼凶光，怕我看出，只是低頭向著地，從眼鏡橫邊暗暗看 我。大哥説，“今天你彷彿很好。”我説“是的。”大哥説，“今天請何先生來，給 你診一診。”我説“可以！”其實我豈不知道這老頭子是劊子手扮的！無非借了看脈 這名目，揣一揣肥瘠：因這功勞，也分一片肉吃。我也不怕；雖然不吃人，膽子卻比 他們還壯。伸出兩個拳頭，看他如何下手。老頭子坐著，閉了眼睛，摸了好一會，呆 了好一會；便張開他鬼眼睛説，“不要亂想。靜靜的養幾天，就好了。” 不要亂想，靜靜的養！養肥了，他們是自然可以多吃；我有什麼好處，怎麼會“好 了”？他們這群人，又想吃人，又是鬼鬼祟祟，想法子遮掩，不敢直截下手，真要令 我笑死。我忍不住，便放聲大笑起來，十分快活。自己曉得這笑聲裏面，有的是義勇 和正氣。老頭子和大哥，都失了色，被我這勇氣正氣鎮壓住了。 但是我有勇氣，他們便越想吃我，沾光一點這勇氣。老頭子跨出門，走不多遠， 便低聲對大哥説道，“趕緊吃罷！”大哥點點頭。原來也有你！這一件大發見，雖似 意外，也在意中：合夥吃我的人，便是我的哥哥！ 吃人的是我哥哥！ 我是吃人的人的兄弟！ 我自己被人吃了，可仍然是吃人的人的兄弟！ 五 這幾天是退一步想：假使那老頭子不是劊子手扮的，真是醫生，也仍然是吃人的 人。他們的祖師李時珍做的“本草什麼”上，明明寫著人肉可以煎吃；他還能説自己 不吃人麼？ 至於我家大哥，也毫不冤枉他。他對我講書的時候，親口説過可以“易子而食”； 又一回偶然議論起一個不好的人，他便説不但該殺，還當“食肉寢皮”。我那時年紀 還小，心跳了好半天。前天狼子村佃戶來説吃心肝的事，他也毫不奇怪，不住的點頭。 可見心思是同從前一樣狠。既然可以“易子而食”，便什麼都易得，什麼人都吃得。 我從前單聽他講道理，也胡塗過去；現在曉得他講道理的時候，不但唇邊還抹著人油， 而且心裡滿裝著吃人的意思。 六 黑漆漆的，不知是日是夜。趙家的狗又叫起來了。 獅子似的凶心，兔子的怯弱，狐狸的狡猾，…… 七 我曉得他們的方法，直捷殺了，是不肯的，而且也不敢，怕有禍祟。所以他們大 家聯絡，佈滿了羅網，逼我自戕。試看前幾天街上男女的樣子，和這幾天我大哥的作 為，便足可悟出八九分了。最好是解下腰帶，掛在樑上，自己緊緊勒死；他們沒有殺 人的罪名，又償了心願，自然都歡天喜地的發出一種嗚嗚咽咽的笑聲。否則驚嚇憂愁 死了，雖則略瘦，也還可以首肯幾下。 他們是只會吃死肉的！——記得什麼書上説，有一種東西，叫"海乙那"的，眼光 和樣子都很難看；時常吃死肉，連極大的骨頭，都細細嚼爛，嚥下肚子去，想起來也 教人害怕。"海乙那"是狼的親眷，狼是狗的本家。前天趙家的狗，看我幾眼，可見他 也同謀，早已接洽。老頭子眼看著地，豈能瞞得我過。 最可憐的是我的大哥，他也是人，何以毫不害怕；而且合夥吃我呢？還是歷來慣 了，不以為非呢？還是喪了良心，明知故犯呢？ 我詛咒吃人的人，先從他起頭；要勸轉吃人的人，也先從他下手。 八 其實這種道理，到了現在，他們也該早已懂得，…… 忽然來了一個人；年紀不過二十左右，相貌是不很看得清楚，滿面笑容，對了我 點頭，他的笑也不像真笑。我便問他，“吃人的事，對麼？”他仍然笑著説，“不是 荒年，怎麼會吃人。”我立刻就曉得，他也是一夥，喜歡吃人的；便自勇氣百倍，偏 要問他。 “對麼？” “這等事問他什麼。你真會……説笑話。……今天天氣很好。” 天氣是好，月色也很亮了。可是我要問你，“對麼？” 他不以為然了。含含糊胡的答道，“不……” “不對？他們何以竟吃？！” “沒有的事……” “沒有的事？狼子村現吃；還有書上都寫著，通紅斬新！” 他便變了臉，鐵一般青。睜著眼説，“有許有的，這是從來如此……” “從來如此，便對麼？” “我不同你講這些道理；總之你不該説，你説便是你錯！” 我直跳起來，張開眼，這人便不見了。全身出了一大片汗。他的年紀，比我大哥 小得遠，居然也是一夥；這一定是他娘老子先教的。還怕已經教給他兒子了；所以連 小孩子，也都惡狠狠的看我。 九 自己想吃人，又怕被別人吃了，都用著疑心極深的眼光，面面相覷。…… 去了這心思，放心做事走路吃飯睡覺，何等舒服。這只是一條門檻，一個關頭。 他們可是父子兄弟夫婦朋友師生仇敵和各不相識的人，都結成一夥，互相勸勉，互相 牽掣，死也不肯跨過這一步。 十 大清早，去尋我大哥；他立在堂門外看天，我便走到他背後，攔住門，格外沉靜， 格外和氣的對他説， “大哥，我有話告訴你。” “你説就是，”他趕緊回過臉來，點點頭。 “我只有幾句話，可是説不出來。大哥，大約當初野蠻的人，都吃過一點人。後 來因為心思不同，有的不吃人了，一味要好，便變了人，變了真的人。有的卻還吃，—— 也同蟲子一樣，有的變了魚鳥猴子，一直變到人。有的不要好，至今還是蟲子。這吃 人的人比不吃人的人，何等慚愧。怕比蟲子的慚愧猴子，還差得很遠很遠。 “易牙蒸了他兒子，給桀紂吃，還是一直從前的事。誰曉得從盤古開闢天地以後， 一直吃到易牙的兒子；從易牙的兒子，一直吃到徐錫林；從徐錫林，又一直吃到狼子 村捉住的人。去年城裡殺了犯人，還有一個生癆病的人，用饅頭蘸血舐。 “他們要吃我，你一個人，原也無法可想；然而又何必去入夥。吃人的人，什麼 事做不出；他們會吃我，也會吃你，一夥裏面，也會自吃。但只要轉一步，只要立刻 改了，也就是人人太平。雖然從來如此，我們今天也可以格外要好，説是不能！大哥， 我相信你能説，前天佃戶要減租，你説過不能。” 當初，他還只是冷笑，隨後眼光便兇狠起來，一到説破他們的隱情，那就滿臉都 變成青色了。大門外立著一夥人，趙貴翁和他的狗，也在裏面，都探頭探腦的挨進來。 有的是看不出面貌，似乎用布蒙著；有的是仍舊青面獠牙，抿著嘴笑。我認識他們是 一夥，都是吃人的人。可是也曉得他們心思很不一樣，一種是以為從來如此，應該吃 的；一種是知道不該吃，可是仍然要吃，又怕別人説破他，所以聽了我的話，越發氣 憤不過，可是抿著嘴冷笑。 這時候，大哥也忽然顯出凶相，高聲喝道， “都出去！瘋子有什麼好看！” 這時候，我又懂得一件他們的巧妙了。他們豈但不肯改，而且早已佈置；預備下 一個瘋子的名目罩上我。將來吃了，不但太平無事，怕還會有人見情。佃戶説的大家 吃了一個惡人，正是這方法。這是他們的老譜！ 陳老五也氣憤憤的直走進來。如何按得住我的口，我偏要對這夥人説， “你們可以改了，從真心改起！要曉得將來容不得吃人的人，活在世上。 “你們要不改，自己也會吃盡。即使生得多，也會給真的人除滅了，同獵人打完 狼子一樣！——同蟲子一樣！” 那一夥人，都被陳老五趕走了。大哥也不知那裡去了。陳老五勸我回屋子裡去。 屋裡面全是黑沉沉的。橫樑和椽子都在頭上發抖；抖了一會，就大起來，堆在我身上。 萬分沉重，動彈不得；他的意思是要我死。我曉得他的沉重是假的，便掙紮出來， 出了一身汗。可是偏要説， “你們立刻改了，從真心改起！你們要曉得將來是容不得吃人的人，……” 十一 太陽也不出，門也不開，日日是兩頓飯。 我捏起筷子，便想起我大哥；曉得妹子死掉的緣故，也全在他。那時我妹子才五 歲，可愛可憐的樣子，還在眼前。母親哭個不住，他卻勸母親不要哭；大約因為自己 吃了，哭起來不免有點過意不去。如果還能過意不去，…… 妹子是被大哥吃了，母親知道沒有，我可不得而知。 母親想也知道；不過哭的時候，卻並沒有説明，大約也以為應當的了。記得我四 五歲時，坐在堂前乘涼，大哥説爺娘生病，做兒子的須割下一片肉來，煮熟了請他吃， 才算好人；母親也沒有説不行。一片吃得，整個的自然也吃得。但是那天的哭法，現 在想起來，實在還教人傷心，這真是奇極的事！ 十二 不能想了。 四千年來時時吃人的地方，今天才明白，我也在其中混了多年；大哥正管著家務， 妹子恰恰死了，他未必不和在飯菜裡，暗暗給我們吃。 我未必無意之中，不吃了我妹子的幾片肉，現在也輪到我自己，…… 有了四千年吃人履歷的我，當初雖然不知道，現在明白，難見真的人！ 十三 沒有吃過人的孩子，或者還有？ 救救孩子…… 一九一八年四月。

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 狂人日記 *** Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will be renamed. Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution. START: FULL LICENSE THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at www.gutenberg.org/license. Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works 1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8. 1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below. 1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the United States and you are located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you share it without charge with others. 1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any country other than the United States. 1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg: 1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or distributed: This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this eBook. 1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™ trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9. 1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™. 1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg™ License. 1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1. 1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9. 1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that: • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.” • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works. • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of receipt of the work. • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works. 1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below. 1.F. 1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment. 1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE. 1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem. 1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE. 1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions. 1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any Defect you cause. Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™ Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks of life. Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org. Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit 501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws. The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS. The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate. While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us with offers to donate. International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff. Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate. Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support. Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition. Most people start at our website which has the main PG search facility: www.gutenberg.org. This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™, including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/25297/pg25297-images.html

---

https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/25606/pg25606-images.html

魏書一　　武帝紀第一

　　太祖武皇帝，沛國譙人也，姓曹，諱操，字孟德，漢相國參之後。〔曹瞞傳曰〕：太祖一名吉利，小字阿瞞。王沈魏書曰：其先出於黃帝。當高陽世，陸終之子曰安，是為曹姓。周武王克殷，存先世之後，封曹俠於邾。春秋之世，與於盟會，逮至戰國，為楚所滅。子孫分流，或家於沛。漢高祖之起，曹參以功封平陽侯，世襲爵土，絕而複紹，至今適嗣國於容城。桓帝世，曹騰為中常侍大長秋，封費亭侯。司馬彪續漢書曰：騰父節，字元偉，素以仁厚稱。鄰人有亡豕者，與節豕相類，詣門認之，節不與爭；後所亡豕自還其家，豕主人大慚，送所認豕，並辭謝節，節笑而受之。由是鄉黨貴歎焉。長子伯興，次子仲興，次子叔興。騰字季興，少除黃門從官。永甯元年，鄧太后詔黃門令選中黃門從官年少溫謹者配皇太子書，騰應其選。太子特親愛騰，飲食賞賜與眾有異。順帝即位，為小黃門，遷至中常侍大長秋。在省闥三十餘年，曆事四帝，未嘗有過。好進達賢能，終無所毀傷。其所稱薦，若陳留虞放、邊韶、南陽延固、張溫、弘農張奐、潁川堂谿典等，皆致位公卿，而不伐其善。蜀郡太守因計吏修敬於騰，益州刺史種暠於函谷關搜得其箋，上太守，並奏騰內臣外交，所不當為，請免官治罪。帝曰：「箋自外來，騰書不出，非其罪也。」乃寢暠奏。騰不以介意，常稱歎暠，以為暠得事上之節。暠後為司徒，語人曰：「今日為公，乃曹常侍恩也。」騰之行事，皆此類也。桓帝即位，以騰先帝舊臣，忠孝彰著，封費亭侯，加位特進。太和三年，追尊騰曰高皇帝。養子嵩嗣，官至太尉，莫能審其生出本末。續漢書曰：嵩字巨高。質性敦慎，所在忠孝。為司隸校尉，靈帝擢拜大司農、大鴻臚，代崔烈為太尉。黃初元年，追尊嵩曰太皇帝。吳人作曹瞞傳及郭頒世語並雲：嵩，夏侯氏之子，夏侯惇之叔父。太祖於惇為從父兄弟。嵩生太祖。

　　太祖少機警，有權數，而任俠放蕩，不治行業，故世人未之奇也；曹瞞傳雲：太祖少好飛鷹走狗，遊蕩無度，其叔父數言之於嵩。太祖患之，後逢叔父於路，乃陽敗面口；叔父怪而問其故，太祖曰：「卒中惡風。」叔父以告嵩。嵩驚愕，呼太祖，太祖口貌如故。嵩問曰：「叔父言汝中風，已差乎？」太祖曰：「初不中風，但失愛於叔父，故見罔耳。」嵩乃疑焉。自後叔父有所告，嵩終不復信，太祖於是益得肆意矣。惟梁國橋玄、南陽何顒異焉。玄謂太祖曰：「天下將亂，非命世之才不能濟也，能安之者，其在君乎！」魏書曰：太尉橋玄，世名知人，睹太祖而異之，曰：「吾見天下名士多矣，未有若君者也！君善自持。吾老矣！原以妻子為託。」由是聲名益重。續漢書曰：玄字公祖，嚴明有才略，長於人物。張璠漢紀曰：玄曆位中外，以剛斷稱，謙儉下士，不以王爵私親。光和中為太尉，以久病策罷，拜太中大夫，卒，家貧乏產業，柩無所殯。當世以此稱為名臣。世語曰：玄謂太祖曰：「君未有名，可交許子將。」太祖乃造子將，子將納焉，由是知名。孫盛異同雜語雲：太祖嘗私入中常侍張讓室，讓覺之；乃舞手戟於庭，逾垣而出。才武絕人，莫之能害。博覽群書，特好兵法，抄集諸家兵法，名曰接要，又注孫武十三篇，皆傳於世。嘗問許子將：「我何如人？」子將不答。固問之，子將曰：「子治世之能臣，亂世之奸雄。」太祖大笑。年二十，舉孝廉為郎，除洛陽北部尉，遷頓丘令，曹瞞傳曰：太祖初入尉廨，繕治四門。造五色棒，縣門左右各十餘枚，有犯禁，不避豪強，皆棒殺之。後數月，靈帝愛幸小黃門蹇碩叔父夜行，即殺之。京師斂跡，莫敢犯者。近習寵臣鹹疾之，然不能傷，於是共稱薦之，故遷為頓丘令。徵拜議郎。魏書曰：太祖從妹夫強侯宋奇被誅，從坐免官。後以能明古學，複徵拜議郎。先是大將軍竇武、太傅陳蕃謀誅閹官，反為所害。太祖上書陳武等正直而見陷害，奸邪盈朝，善人壅塞，其言甚切；靈帝不能用。是後詔書敕三府：舉奏州縣政理無效，民為作謠言者免罷之。三公傾邪，皆希世見詔用，貨賂並行，強者為怨，不見舉奏，弱者守道，多被陷毀。太祖疾之。是歲以災異博問得失，因此複上書切諫，說三公所舉奏專回避貴戚之意。奏上，天子感悟，以示三府責讓之，諸以謠言徵者皆拜議郎。是後政教日亂，豪猾益熾，多所摧毀；太祖知不可匡正，遂不復獻言。

　　光和末，黃巾起。拜騎都尉，討潁川賊。遷為濟南相，國有十餘縣，長吏多阿附貴戚，贓汙狼藉，於是奏免其八；禁斷淫祀，奸宄逃竄，郡界肅然。魏書曰：長吏受取貪饕，依倚貴勢，曆前相不見舉；聞太祖至，咸皆舉免，小大震怖，奸宄遁逃，竄入他郡。政教大行，一郡清平。初，城陽景王劉章以有功於漢，故其國為立祠，青州諸郡轉相仿效，濟南尤盛，至六百餘祠。賈人或假二千石輿服導從作倡樂，奢侈日甚，民坐貧窮，曆世長吏無敢禁絕者。太祖到，皆毀壞祠屋，止絕官吏民不得祠祀。及至秉政，遂除奸邪鬼神之事，世之淫祀由此遂絕。久之，徵還為東郡太守；不就，稱疾歸鄉里。魏書曰：於是權臣專朝，貴戚橫恣。太祖不能違道取容。數數幹忤，恐為家禍，遂乞留宿衛。拜議郎，常讬疾病，輒告歸鄉里；築室城外，春夏習讀書傳，秋冬弋獵，以自娛樂。

　　頃之，冀州刺史王芬、南陽許攸、沛國周旌等連結豪傑，謀廢靈帝，立合肥侯，以告太祖，太祖拒之。芬等遂敗。司馬彪九州春秋曰：於是陳蕃子逸與術士平原襄楷會於芬坐，楷曰：「天文不利宦者，黃門、常侍（貴）族滅矣。」逸喜。芬曰：「若然者，芬原驅除。」於是與攸等結謀。靈帝欲北巡河間舊宅，芬等謀因此作難，上書言黑山賊攻劫郡縣，求得起兵。會北方有赤氣，東西竟天，太史上言「當有陰謀，不宜北行」，帝乃止。敕芬罷兵，俄而徵之。芬懼，自殺。魏書載太祖拒芬辭曰：「夫廢立之事，天下之至不祥也。古人有權成敗、計輕重而行之者，伊尹、霍光是也。伊尹懷至忠之誠，據宰臣之勢，處官司之上，故進退廢置，計從事立。及至霍光受讬國之任，藉宗臣之位，內因太后秉政之重，外有群卿同欲之勢，昌邑即位日淺，未有貴寵，朝乏讜臣，議出密近，故計行如轉圜，事成如摧朽。今諸君徒見曩者之易，未睹當今之難。諸君自度，結眾連党，何若七國？合肥之貴，孰若吳、楚？而造作非常，欲望必克，不亦危乎！」

　　金城邊章、韓遂殺刺史郡守以叛，眾十餘萬，天下騷動。徵太祖為典軍校尉。會靈帝崩，太子即位，太后臨朝。大將軍何進與袁紹謀誅宦官，太后不聽。進乃召董卓，欲以脅太后，魏書曰：太祖聞而笑之曰：「閹豎之官，古今宜有，但世主不當假之權寵，使至於此。既治其罪，當誅元惡，一獄吏足矣，何必紛紛召外將乎？欲盡誅之，事必宣露，吾見其敗也。」卓未至而進見殺。卓到，廢帝為弘農王而立獻帝，京都大亂。卓表太祖為驍騎校尉，欲與計事。太祖乃變易姓名，間行東歸。魏曰：太祖以卓終必覆敗，遂不就拜，逃歸鄉里。從數騎過故人成皋呂伯奢；伯奢不在，其子與賓客共劫太祖，取馬及物，太祖手刃擊殺數人。世語曰：太祖過伯奢。伯奢出行，五子皆在，備賓主禮。太祖自以背卓命，疑其圖己，手劍夜殺八人而去。孫盛雜記曰：太祖聞其食器聲，以為圖己，遂夜殺之。既而悽愴曰：「甯我負人，毋人負我！」遂行。出關，過中牟，為亭長所疑，執詣縣，邑中或竊識之，為請得解。世語曰：中牟疑是亡人，見拘於縣。時掾亦已被卓書；唯功曹心知是太祖，以世方亂，不宜拘天下雄俊，因白令釋之。卓遂殺太后及弘農王。太祖至陳留，散家財，合義兵，將以誅卓。冬十二月，始起兵於己吾，世語曰：陳留孝廉衛茲以家財資太祖，使起兵，眾有五千人。是歲中平六年也。

　　初平元年春正月，後將軍袁術、冀州牧韓馥、英雄記曰：馥字文節，潁川人。為禦史中丞。董卓舉為冀州牧。于時冀州民人殷盛，兵糧優足。袁紹之在勃海，馥恐其興兵，遣數部從事守之，不得動搖。東郡太守橋瑁詐作京師三公移書與州郡，陳卓罪惡，雲「見逼迫，無以自救，企望義兵，解國患難。」馥得移，請諸從事問曰：「今當助袁氏邪，助董卓邪？」治中從事劉子惠曰：「今興兵為國，何謂袁、董！」馥自知言短而有慚色。子惠複言：「兵者凶事，不可為首；今宜往視他州，有發動者，然後和之。冀州於他州不為弱也，他人功未有在冀州之右者也。」馥然之。馥乃作書與紹，道卓之惡，聽其舉兵。豫州刺史孔伷、英雄記曰：伷字公緒，陳留人。張璠漢紀載鄭泰說卓雲：「孔公緒能清談高論，噓枯吹生。」兗州刺史劉岱、岱，劉繇之兄，事見吳志。河內太守王匡、英雄記曰：匡字公節，泰山人。輕財好施，以任俠聞。辟大將軍何進府進符使，匡於徐州發強弩五百西詣京師。會進敗，匡還州裏。起家，拜河內太守。謝承後漢書曰：匡少與蔡邕善。其年為卓軍所敗，走還泰山，收集勁勇得數千人，欲與張邈合。匡先殺執金吾胡母班。班親屬不勝憤怒，與太祖並勢，共殺匡。勃海太守袁紹、陳留太守張邈、東郡太守橋瑁、英雄記曰：瑁字元偉，玄族子。先為兗州刺史，甚有威惠。山陽太守袁遺、遺字伯業，紹從兄。為長安令。河間張超嘗薦遺于太尉硃俊，稱遺「有冠世之懿，幹時之量。其忠允亮直，固天所縱；若乃包羅載籍，管綜百氏，登高能賦，睹物知名，求之今日，邈焉靡儔。」事在超集合。英雄記曰：紹後用遺為揚州刺史，為袁術所敗。太祖稱「長大而能勤學者，惟吾與袁伯業耳。」語在文帝典論。濟北相鮑信信事見子勳傳。同時俱起兵，眾各數萬，推紹為盟主。太祖行奮武將軍。

　　二月，卓聞兵起，乃徙天子都長安。卓留屯洛陽，遂焚宮室。是時紹屯河內，邈、岱、瑁、遺屯酸棗，術屯南陽，伷屯潁川，馥在鄴。卓兵強，紹等莫敢先進。太祖曰：「舉義兵以誅暴亂，大眾已合，諸君何疑？向使董卓聞山東兵起，倚王室之重，據二周之險，東向以臨天下；雖以無道行之，猶足為患。今焚燒宮室，劫遷天子，海內震動，不知所歸，此天亡之時也。一戰而天下定矣，不可失也。」遂引兵西，將據成皋。邈遣將衛茲分兵隨太祖。到滎陽汴水，遇卓將徐榮，與戰不利，士卒死傷甚多。太祖為流矢所中，所乘馬被創，從弟洪以馬與太祖，得夜遁去。榮見太祖所將兵少，力戰盡日，謂酸棗未易攻也，亦引兵還。

　　太祖到酸棗，諸軍兵十餘萬，日置酒高會，不圖進取。太祖責讓之，因為謀曰：「諸君聽吾計，使勃海引河內之眾臨孟津，酸棗諸將守成皋，據敖倉，塞轘轅、太谷，全制其險；使袁將軍率南陽之軍軍丹、析，入武關，以震三輔：皆高壘深壁，勿與戰，益為疑兵，示天下形勢，以順誅逆，可立定也。今兵以義動，持疑而不進，失天下之望，竊為諸君恥之！」邈等不能用。

　　太祖兵少，乃與夏侯惇等詣揚州募兵，刺史陳溫、丹楊太守周昕與兵四千餘人。還到龍亢，士卒多叛。魏書曰：兵謀叛，夜燒太祖帳，太祖手劍殺數十人，餘皆披靡，乃得出營；其不叛者五百餘人。至銍、建平，複收兵得千餘人，進屯河內。

　　劉岱與橋瑁相惡，岱殺瑁，以王肱領東郡太守。

　　袁紹與韓馥謀立幽州牧劉虞為帝，太祖拒之。魏書載太祖答紹曰：「董卓之罪，暴于四海，吾等合大眾、興義兵而遠近莫不回應，此以義動故也。今幼主微弱，制于奸臣，未有昌邑亡國之釁，而一旦改易，天下其孰安之？諸君北面，我自西向。」紹又嘗得一玉印，於太祖坐中舉向其肘，太祖由是笑而惡焉。魏書曰：太祖大笑曰：「吾不聽汝也。」紹複使人說太祖曰：「今袁公勢盛兵強，二子已長，天下群英，孰逾於此？」太祖不應。由是益不直紹，圖誅滅之。

　　二年春，紹、馥遂立虞為帝，虞終不敢當。

　　夏四月，卓還長安。

　　秋七月，袁紹脅韓馥，取冀州。

　　黑山賊于毒、白繞、眭固等眭，申隨反。十餘萬眾略魏郡、東郡，王肱不能禦，太祖引兵入東郡，擊白繞于濮陽，破之。袁紹因表太祖為東郡太守，治東武陽。

　　三年春，太祖軍頓丘，毒等攻東武陽。太祖乃引兵西入山，攻毒等本屯。魏書曰：諸將皆以為當還自救。太祖曰：「孫臏救趙而攻魏，耿弇欲走西安攻臨菑。使賊聞我西而還，武陽自解也；不還，我能敗其本屯，虜不能拔武陽必矣。」遂乃行。毒聞之，棄武陽還。太祖要擊眭固，又擊匈奴於夫羅於內黃，皆大破之。魏書曰：於夫羅者，南單于子也。中平中，發匈奴兵，於夫羅率以助漢。會本國反，殺南單于，於夫羅遂將其眾留中國。因天下撓亂，與西河白波賊合，破太原、河內，抄略諸郡為寇。

　　夏四月，司徒王允與呂布共殺卓。卓將李傕、郭汜等殺允攻布，布敗，東出武關。傕等擅朝政。

　　青州黃巾眾百萬入兗州，殺任城相鄭遂，轉入東平。劉岱欲擊之，鮑信諫曰：「今賊眾百萬，百姓皆震恐，士卒無鬥志，不可敵也。觀賊眾群輩相隨，軍無輜重，唯以鈔略為資，今不若畜士眾之力，先為固守。彼欲戰不得，攻又不能，其勢必離散，後選精銳，據其要害，擊之可破也。」岱不從，遂與戰，果為所殺。世語曰：岱既死，陳宮謂太祖曰：「州今無主，而王命斷絕，宮請說州中，明府尋往牧之，資之以收天下，此霸王之業也。」宮說別駕、治中曰：「今天下分裂而州無主；曹東郡，命世之才也，若迎以牧州，必寧生民。」鮑信等亦謂之然。信乃與州吏萬潛等至東郡迎太祖領兗州牧。遂進兵擊黃巾于壽張東。信力戰鬥死，僅而破之。魏書曰：太祖將步騎千餘人，行視戰地，卒抵賊營，戰不利，死者數百人，引還。賊尋前進。黃巾為賊久，數乘勝，兵皆精悍。太祖舊兵少，新兵不習練，舉軍皆懼。太祖被甲嬰胄，親巡將士，明勸賞罰，眾乃複奮，承間討擊，賊稍折退。賊乃移書太祖曰：「昔在濟南，毀壞神壇，其道乃與中黃太乙同，似若知道，今更迷惑。漢行已盡，黃家當立。天之大運，非君才力所能存也。」太祖見檄書，呵罵之，數開示降路；遂設奇伏，晝夜會戰，戰輒禽獲，賊乃退走。購求信喪不得，眾乃刻木如信形狀，祭而哭焉。追黃巾至濟北。乞降。冬，受降卒三十餘萬，男女百餘萬口，收其精銳者，號為青州兵。

　　袁術與紹有隙，術求援於公孫瓚，瓚使劉備屯高唐，單經屯平原，陶謙屯發幹，以逼紹。太祖與紹會擊，皆破之。

　　四年春，軍鄄城。荊州牧劉表斷術糧道，術引軍入陳留，屯封丘，黑山餘賊及於夫羅等佐之。術使將劉詳屯匡亭。太祖擊詳，術救之，與戰，大破之。術退保封丘，遂圍之，未合，術走襄邑，追到太壽，決渠水灌城。走寧陵，又追之，走九江。夏，太祖還軍定陶。

　　下邳闕宣聚眾數千人，自稱天子；徐州牧陶謙與共舉兵，取泰山華、費，略任城。秋，太祖征陶謙，下十餘城，謙守城不敢出。

　　是歲，孫策受袁術使渡江，數年間遂有江東。

　　興平元年春，太祖自徐州還，初，太祖父嵩，去官後還譙，董卓之亂，避難琅邪，為陶謙所害，故太祖志在複讎東伐。世語曰：嵩在泰山華縣。太祖令泰山太守應劭送家詣兗州，劭兵未至，陶謙密遣數千騎掩捕。嵩家以為劭迎，不設備。謙兵至，殺太祖弟德于門中。嵩懼，穿後垣，先出其妾，妾肥，不時得出；嵩逃於廁，與妾俱被害，闔門皆死。劭懼，棄官赴袁紹。後太祖定冀州，劭時已死。韋曜吳書曰：太祖迎嵩，輜重百餘兩。陶謙遣都尉張闓將騎二百衛送，闓於泰山華、費間殺嵩，取財物，因奔淮南。太祖歸咎於陶謙，故伐之。夏，使荀彧、程昱守鄄城，複征陶謙，拔五城，遂略地至東海。還過郯，謙將曹豹與劉備屯郯東，要太祖。太祖擊破之，遂攻拔襄賁，所過多所殘戮。孫盛曰：夫伐罪吊民，古之令軌；罪謙之由，而殘其屬部，過矣。

　　會張邈與陳宮叛迎呂布，郡縣皆應。荀彧、程昱保鄄城，范、東阿二縣固守，太祖乃引軍還。布到，攻鄄城不能下，西屯濮陽。太祖曰：「布一旦得一州，不能據東平，斷亢父、泰山之道乘險要我，而乃屯濮陽，吾知其無能為也。」遂進軍攻之。布出兵戰，先以騎犯青州兵。青州兵奔，太祖陳亂，馳突火出，墜馬，燒左手掌。司馬樓異扶太祖上馬，遂引去。袁獻帝春秋曰：太祖圍濮陽，濮陽大姓田氏為反間，太祖得入城。燒其東門，示無反意。及戰，軍敗。布騎得太祖而不知是，問曰：「曹操何在？」太祖曰：「乘黃馬走者是也。」布騎乃釋太祖而追黃馬者。門火猶盛，太祖突火而出。未至營止，諸將未與太祖相見，皆怖。太祖乃自力勞軍，令軍中促為攻具，進複攻之，與布相守百餘日。蝗蟲起，百姓大餓，布糧食亦盡，各引去。

　　秋九月，太祖還鄄城。布到乘氏，為其縣人李進所破，東屯山陽。於是紹使人說太祖，欲連和。太祖新失兗州，軍食盡，將許之。程昱止太祖，太祖從之。冬十月，太祖至東阿。

　　是歲穀一斛五十餘萬錢，人相食，乃罷吏兵新募者。陶謙死，劉備代之。

　　二年春，襲定陶。濟陰太守吳資保南城，未拔。會呂布至，又擊破之。夏，布將薛蘭、李封屯钜野，太祖攻之，布救蘭，蘭敗，布走，遂斬蘭等。布複從東緡與陳宮將萬餘人來戰，時太祖兵少，設伏，縱奇兵擊，大破之。魏書曰：於是兵皆出取麥，在者不能千人，屯營不固。太祖乃令婦人守陴，悉兵拒之。屯西有大堤，其南樹木幽深。布疑有伏，乃相謂曰：「曹操多譎，勿入伏中。」引軍屯南十餘裏。明日複來，太祖隱兵堤裏，出半兵堤外。布益進，乃令輕兵挑戰，既合，伏兵乃悉乘堤，步騎並進，大破之，獲其鼓車，追至其營而還。布夜走，太祖複攻，拔定陶，分兵平諸縣。布東奔劉備，張邈從布，使其弟超將家屬保雍丘。秋八月，圍雍丘。冬十月，天子拜太祖兗州牧。十二月，雍丘潰，超自殺。夷邈三族。邈詣袁術請救，為其眾所殺，兗州平，遂東略陳地。

---

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Big_Butte_Creek

Big Butte Creek

River in Oregon, United States of America

Big Butte Creek is a 12-mile-long (19 km) tributary of the Rogue River in the U.S. state of Oregon. It drains approximately 245 square miles (635 km2) of Jackson County. Its two forks, the North Fork and the South Fork, both begin high in the Cascade Range near Mount McLoughlin. Flowing predominantly west, they meet near the city of Butte Falls. The main stem flows generally northwest until it empties into the Rogue River near McLeod, about one mile southwest of William L. Jess Dam and Lost Creek Lake.

Big Butte Creek's watershed was originally settled over 8,000 years ago by the Klamath, Upper Umpqua, and Takelma tribes of Native Americans. In the Rogue River Wars of the 1850s, most of the Native Americans were either killed or forced onto Indian reservations. The first white settlers arrived in the 1860s, naming the creek after Snowy Butte, an early name for Mount McLoughlin. In the late 19th century, the watershed was primarily used for agriculture and logging. The small city of Butte Falls was incorporated in 1911, and remains the only incorporated town within the watershed's boundaries.

Big Butte Springs, located in the watershed, provides clean drinking water to more than 115,000 residents of the Rogue Valley. It emits over 26 million US gallons (98,000,000 L) of water per day. Water from Big Butte Creek is also diverted for irrigation at several other locations.

The water quality of the Big Butte Creek watershed is generally high, and it supports several species of trout and salmon. The watershed is also home to more than 152 species of birds, 63 species of mammals, 19 species of reptiles, and numerous plants. The Poverty Flats region was designated an Area of Critical Environmental Concern by the Bureau of Land Management in 1995 to protect several rare species of plants.

Course
Big Butte Creek begins in the Cascade Range near Butte Falls. It flows generally northwest over approximately 12 miles (19 km) to its confluence with the Rogue River.[3][6] The two main forks of Big Butte Creek, the North Fork and the South Fork, merge at 2,244 feet (684 m) above sea level,[a] while the creek's mouth is located at an elevation of 1,562 feet (476.1 m).[1]

The North Fork's headwaters are located on the slopes of the 6,207-foot-tall (1,892 m) Rustler Peak.[6][7] It flows southwest, receiving many small tributaries such as Jackass, Eighty Acre, and Friese creeks. Turning west, it flows just north of Butte Falls before merging with the South Fork.[6]

The South Fork begins at the confluence of two of its tributaries, Twincheria and Rancheria creeks. It flows southwest, receiving Fourbit Creek on the left.[6] Fourbit Creek begins near Mount McLoughlin, where massive faults may allow water to seep into it from nearby Fourmile Lake in the Klamath River watershed.[4] The South Fork turns west and receives Willow Creek on the left. Big Butte Springs are located on Willow Creek, and the Medford Aqueduct, which carries drinking water to cities in the Rogue Valley, parallels the South Fork from there all the way to Butte Falls. The South Fork flows over the 15-foot-tall (4.6 m) Butte Falls—the nearby city's namesake—and merges with the North Fork about 1 mile (1.6 km) downstream.[3][6][8]

Big Butte Creek travels northwest, gathering McNeil Creek on the left and Clark Creek on the right, along with many other minor tributaries.[6] This region contains many Class II and III rapids, as rated on the International Scale of River Difficulty.[8] The stream is crossed by Cobleigh Road at river mile (RM) 9.5 or river kilometer (RK) 15,[9] and Netherlands Road at RM 3 (RK 4.8).[10] About 0.6 miles (1 km) before its mouth, Big Butte Creek cascades over Crowfoot Falls and is crossed by Crowfoot Road.[11][12] It then flows into the Rogue River 155 miles (249 km) from its mouth at the Pacific Ocean.[12] Big Butte Creek's mouth is about one mile southwest of William L. Jess Dam, and Oregon Route 62 passes just north of it.[6][12]

Discharge
The United States Geological Survey monitors the flow of Big Butte Creek at three different stream gauges: two on the South Fork, and one on the main stem. Both South Fork gauges were shut down in 1991, but the gauge located near the mouth of Big Butte Creek continues to operate. The main stem often discharges less water than the South Fork alone in the summer months because of numerous diversions.[4]

Discharge
Stream	
Location	
Drainage basin	
Years recorded	
Average flow	
Maximum flow	
Minimum flow
South Fork	
above Willow Creek	
67.6 sq mi (175 km2)[13]	
1986–1991	
61.4 cu ft/s (1.74 m3/s)[13]	
662 cu ft/s (18.7 m3/s)
(February 23, 1986)[14]	
21 cu ft/s (0.59 m3/s)
(August–September 1988, September 1990)[15]
South Fork	
near Butte Falls	
138 sq mi (357 km2)[16]	
1911–1991	
151 cu ft/s (4.28 m3/s)[16]	
12,600 cu ft/s (357 m3/s)
(December 22, 1964)[17]	
31 cu ft/s (0.88 m3/s)
(September 1981)[18]
Main stem	
near mouth	
245 sq mi (635 km2)[5]	
1945–Present	
244 cu ft/s (6.91 m3/s)[5]	
16,800 cu ft/s (476 m3/s)
(December 22, 1964)[5]	
6.4 cu ft/s (0.18 m3/s)
(June 23–24, 1977)[5]
Watershed
The North Fork begins on Rustler Peak. It flows southwest, then west, gathering many small tributaries. The South Fork begins at the confluence of Rancheria and Twincheria creeks, flowing generally west. One of its main tributaries is Willow Creek, whose headwaters are on Mount McLoughlin. It is impounded by Willow Dam, creating Willow Lake. Big Butte Springs is also located on Willow Creek. The two forks merge at Butte Falls. Big Butte Creek flows northwest until it enters the Rogue River near Lost Creek Lake. The Big Butte Creek watershed is located almost entirely within Jackson County, with a small eastern portion in Klamath County.
A map of the Big Butte Creek watershed
Big Butte Creek drains approximately 245 square miles (635 km2) of southern Oregon. Elevations range from 1,562 feet (476.1 m) at the creek's mouth to 9,495 feet (2,894 m) at the summit of Mount McLoughlin, with an average of 3,528 feet (1,075 m).[19][20] About 56 percent is federally owned by the Bureau of Land Management and the United States Forest Service, 44 percent is privately owned, and a small fraction belongs to the City of Medford.[19]

The Big Butte Creek watershed experiences a Mediterranean climate. Temperatures range from 10 °F (−12 °C) in the winter to 100 °F (38 °C) in the summer.[4][21][22] Precipitation averages between 35 and 80 inches (890 and 2,000 mm) annually. Most precipitation occurs between November and March.[4][21][22] Nine percent of the watershed's surface runoff is collected from rain, 35 percent from rain on snow, and 56 percent from snow.[19] The watershed contains the largest groundwater source in the entire Rogue River basin; one major outlet is at Big Butte Springs.[4]

The watershed is split into two geographic regions: the High Cascades and the Western Cascades, both volcanic in origin. The Western Cascades compose the western two thirds of the watershed. This region is highly eroded, being between 17 and 38 million years old. Its unstable slopes are primarily made of pyroclastic rock. Due to the rock's high ability to absorb moisture, earthflows are common. The High Cascades are much younger, around three to seven million years old. Mount McLoughlin is the most prominent High Cascade volcano in the watershed, last erupting between 20,000 and 15,000 years ago.[23] Basalt and andesite are the most common rock types in this region.[4][19]

Nearby watersheds include Little Butte Creek to the south, small Klamath River tributaries such as Fourmile Creek to the east, the South Fork Rogue River to the east and north, and minor tributaries of the Rogue River including Reese and Indian creeks to the west.[6]

Flora and fauna
A midsized bird perched on a moss covered limb. It has brown feathers, covered with white to tan spots. Its eyes are round and black, and its beak is short and curved downward.
The northern spotted owl, a rare species that inhabits the watershed
Some of the most common trees that grow in the Big Butte Creek watershed include four species of fir, two species of pine, incense cedar, and western hemlock. The understory contains plants such as Pacific yew, Pacific madrone, chinquapin, and vine maple. Several invasive species have been reported in the Big Butte Creek watershed, such as Kentucky bluegrass, common bent, drooping brome, and redtop. The spread of these species is most likely due to overgrazing.[4] Sensitive species that grow in the watershed include Howell's yampah, Egg Lake monkeyflower, clustered lady's slipper, green-flowered ginger, Mount Mazama collomia, and Detling's microseris.[4][22] Mallow and popcorn flower have also been discovered in riparian zones. The Poverty Flats Area of Critical Environmental Concern (ACEC) is home to several rare species of plants, including Bellinger's meadowfoam, Howell's yampah, and Rocky Mountain woodsia.[21]

Over 152 species of birds are known or suspected to live in the Big Butte Creek watershed,[21][22] including the northern goshawk and the northern spotted owl, a vulnerable species. Bald eagles nest around Willow Lake.[4][21][22] Amphibians such as the vulnerable Oregon spotted frog and the near threatened Cascades frog inhabit some regions of the watershed.[21][22] Black-tailed deer, Roosevelt elk, cougars, and black bears are the most common of the 63 species of mammals found in the watershed. Fishers and American martens have also been spotted. The gray wolf and the vulnerable grizzly bear once lived in the watershed, but are now considered extirpated. Nineteen species of reptiles live in the area. Other sensitive species include the wolverine, the western pond turtle, the sandhill crane, and Townsend's big-eared bat.[4]

Rainbow trout, chinook and coho salmon, and Pacific Lamprey are the most common anadromous fish that inhabit Big Butte Creek.[19][21][22] They travel as far as Butte Falls, sometimes passing over it during high flows.[19][22] Because of the cold, sterile conditions of the water and the difficulty of jumping over the Butte Creek waterfall, streams above Butte Falls have very low populations of anadromous fish.[4] Native, resident fish in this area include coastal cutthroat and rainbow trout.[4][19] Willow Lake contains largemouth bass and rainbow, cutthroat, and brook trout.[4] Overall, the number of fish in the Big Butte Creek watershed has declined in recent years, possibly due to the clearing of riparian zones and rising water temperatures.[21][22]

History
A short, wide, moderate-sized waterfall surrounded by vegetation
Butte Falls, located on the South Fork of Big Butte Creek
Humans have lived in the Big Butte Creek area for at least 8,000 years.[4] The Klamath, Upper Umpqua, Takelma, and Latgawa tribes of Native Americans inhabited the watershed until they were driven out in the Rogue River Wars of the 1850s.[4][21] On Christmas Eve, December 24, 1855, Captain E. A. Rice along with 34 other men attacked a Native American encampment near the creek's mouth. Eighteen Native American men were killed, all the women and children were captured, and the camp was burned to the ground.[24] Most were relocated to Indian reservations. Non-indigenous settlers first arrived in the early 1860s, and agriculture, ranching, and logging industries quickly developed.[4][21] Big Butte Creek was named by early settlers for its close proximity to Mount McLoughlin (also known as Snowy Butte), as was nearby Little Butte Creek.[25]

In 1904, a water-powered sawmill was constructed at Butte Falls. The town of Butte Falls was established in 1906, and incorporated in 1911.[4][19][22] The Pacific and Eastern Railway was constructed to Butte Falls in 1910.[4][22] Butte Falls also received water rights to Ginger Springs, providing high quality drinking water for the town.[19][22]

The Cat Hill Burn destroyed 30,000 acres (120 km2) of forest on Rustler Peak in 1910.[4][22] In 1915, the Eagle Point Irrigation Canal was constructed, diverting approximately 100 cubic feet per second (2.83 m3/s) of water for irrigation in the Little Butte Creek watershed.[19][20] The canal begins just below Butte Falls.[4] The Butte Falls Fish Hatchery was also constructed in 1915.[22][26] Originally, the hatchery impounded water from Ginger Creek, however in 1923 a canal was built transferring 15.5 cubic feet per second (0.439 m3/s) of water from the South Fork of Big Butte Creek.[19][22][26] The Medford Aqueduct, a 31-inch-wide (79 cm) pipeline, was constructed in 1927. It delivers about 40 cubic feet per second (1.1 m3/s) of drinking water from Big Butte Springs south to the Bear Creek watershed.[4][27][28] In 1951, a second pipeline was added, and Willow Dam was constructed, creating Willow Lake.[28] The springs serve over 115,000 customers throughout the Rogue Valley.[29]

Loggers felled massive amounts of forest in the 1920s and 1930s. Reforestation efforts began in the 1940s because natural regeneration could not keep pace with the rate of logging. In 1962, the Columbus Day Storm knocked many more large trees to the ground. Today, old-growth forest covers only about five percent of the watershed.[4]

In 1995, the Poverty Flats region was designated an Area of Critical Environmental Concern (ACEC) by the Bureau of Land Management. Located about 3.5 miles (5.6 km) west of Butte Falls, the ACEC is home to several rare species of plants. It was fenced off in 1996 to protect the area from roaming cattle.[21]

The Butte Falls Fish Hatchery was scheduled to be closed by the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife in July 2009 as part of a statewide effort to decrease the department's budget,[30] but on July 3 it was announced that the hatchery would continue to operate with only one employee.[31] However, the hatchery was closed permanently in October 2010.[32]

A 160-foot (49 m) portion of the Eagle Point Irrigation Canal failed on October 2, 2011, sending 86 cubic feet per second (2.4 m3/s) of muddy water down a hillside, across a road, and into lower Big Butte Creek, a vital salmon spawning area. A stream gauge on the Rogue River about 15 miles (24 km) downstream reported turbidity levels twenty times higher than before the breach.[33][34] The canal was repaired by October 28.[34]

Pollution
The Oregon Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) has monitored Big Butte Creek for eight different parameters that affect water quality: temperature, oxygen saturation, pH, nutrients, bacteria, chemical contaminants such as pesticides and metals, turbidity, and alkalinity. Streams that exceed the standard level are placed on the DEQ 303d list in accordance with the Clean Water Act. About 54.2 miles (87.2 km) of the streams in the Big Butte Creek watershed were listed on the 2004/2006 DEQ 303d list. The entire main stem exceeded the standard level for temperature, oxygen saturation, and E. coli, a type of bacteria. The lower 13.9 miles (22.4 km) of the North Fork were listed for high temperature, along with many other minor tributaries. The South Fork was not listed, although some of its tributaries were.[19]

A map of the Butte Falls Discovery Loop Tour, which passes through scenic areas of the Rogue River – Siskiyou National Forest
Overall, water quality in the Big Butte Creek watershed is generally high, however road construction and logging can cause severe erosion, leading to high levels of sedimentation and turbidity. The Willow Creek region often experiences high turbidity, but Willow Lake traps the sediment before it can travel downstream. Big Butte Springs provides clean water that requires minimal treatment to meet water quality standards. Water from the springs has very little chemical pollution, low turbidity, and temperatures averaging between 44 and 46 °F (6.7 and 7.8 °C).[4]

Recreation
Popular recreational activities in the Big Butte Creek watershed include hunting, camping, hiking, and horseback riding.[4][21][22] Many tourists also come to sight-see.[22] The most heavily used trail in the area is the Blue Canyon Trail, leading to the Sky Lakes Wilderness, and ultimately the larger Pacific Crest Trail.[6][22] The city of Butte Falls has organized the Butte Falls Discovery Loop Tour, a half-day-long drive through the Rogue River – Siskiyou National Forest. The loop starts in Butte Falls, and has several stops for hiking and viewing the landscape, including Mount McLoughlin.[35]

Water recreation on Willow Lake includes boating, swimming, fishing, and waterskiing. Fishing is also popular in other streams, especially Fourbit Creek.[4][22] Cross-country skiing and snowmobiling are popular in the winter.[4]

See also
Notes and references
Notes

^ Jump up to: a b c 
Source elevation and coordinates derived from the GNIS mouth elevations of the North and South forks.[2]
References

Bibliography
Books

News articles

Websites

Other

External links

---

https://zh.wikipedia.org/zh-cn/%E6%97%A7%E9%87%91%E5%B1%B1%E2%80%94%E5%A5%A5%E5%85%8B%E5%85%B0%E6%B5%B7%E6%B9%BE%E5%A4%A7%E6%A1%A5%E5%8D%8A%E7%BE%8E%E5%85%83


旧金山—奥克兰海湾大桥半美元
By 维基媒体项目贡献者

Apr 03, 2025 01:39 AM1 min. readView original
旧金山－奥克兰海湾大桥半美元
美国
面值	
50美分（0.5美元）
重量	
12.5克
直径	
30.61mm （1.2in）
厚度	
2.15mm （0.08in）
边缘	
锯齿纹花边
成分	
银	
0.36169金衡盎司
铸造年份	
1936
铸造量	
10万零55枚，其中55枚为化验委员会保留，后有2万8631枚送回铸币局熔毁
铸币标记	
字母“S”，代表旧金山铸币局
正面

图案	
灰熊
设计师	
雅克·施尼尔
设计时间	
1936年
背面

图案	
旧金山-奥克兰海湾大桥
设计师	
雅克·施尼尔
设计时间	
1936年
旧金山－奥克兰海湾大桥半美元（英语：San Francisco–Oakland Bay Bridge half dollar）又称海湾大桥半美元（Bay Bridge half dollar），是美国铸币局1936年铸造的50美分纪念币，旨在庆祝旧金山-奥克兰海湾大桥在这年十一月建成通车。硬币由雅克·施尼尔设计，正面刻有象征加利福尼亚州的灰熊，背面是旧金山-奥克兰海湾大桥，并有旧金山渡轮大厦做为前景。

1936年美国发行的纪念币种类繁多，递交国会建议为海湾大桥落成发行纪念币的法案就有两份，一份专为海湾大桥，另一份还加入当时一同在建的金门大桥，最终前者顺利通过，再经富兰克林·德拉诺·罗斯福总统签字成为法律正式生效。经过多次修改，施尼尔的设计获美国美术委员会认可，纪念币全部在旧金山铸币局生产。

这款半美元的销售形式除传统的邮购和银行发售外，还有海湾大桥附近设立的摊位，海湾大桥半美元由此成为史上首款买家可以无需下车直接在路上购买的纪念币。1937年2月发售截止时，生产的十万枚半美元共售出七万多，剩下的退回铸币局熔毁。如今这款纪念币视成色而定，价值在数百美元不等。

旧金山-奥克兰海湾大桥于1936年落成，人们终于可以直接驾车往返旧金山和奥克兰。虽然1851年起旧金山湾就有轮渡服务，但桥梁对车主而言无疑方便得多。建桥连接两地的呼声早在19世纪70年代便已涌现，但一直因政治、工程及财政等方面原因——桥梁长度超过13公里，海湾内风大水急，而且缺乏建桥所需的基石——未能落实。直至20世纪30年代，出身加利福尼亚州的赫伯特·胡佛总统大力支持旧金山湾建桥，复兴银行公司（Reconstruction Finance Corporation）同意购买以建成后所收通行费担保的建设债卷，这座当时全世界最大并且耗费最多的桥梁才得以面世。[1]

1954年前，美国纪念币都是由政府以面值卖给国会授权的某个组织，这些组织再加价向公众转售，此后新币就进入二级市场继续流通。1936年初，所有早期纪念币的售价都已超过发行价。公众只需购买并持有纪念币就能轻松等待升值赚取利润，许多人因此开始收集硬币，并且尽量买到新发行的币种。[2]受此影响，美国纪念币市场这年呈现井喷，国会共授权发行十五款之多，不仅史无前例，而且纪录至今未破[3]。国会还应发行团体要求重新授权多款过去发行的币种，例如早在1926年面世的俄勒冈小径纪念半美元[3]。大量纪念币的发行也带来负作用，托马斯·加奇·梅利什（Thomas G. Melish）推动发行并销售的辛辛那提音乐中心半美元所纪念的周年活动根本不存在，还有部分发行商滥用发行和溢价权，引起收藏爱好者强烈不满[4][5]。

面对市场乱象，国会从1936年中期开始采取行动，在纪念币授权法案中加入保护消费者利益的条款，如新授权发行的纪念币只能在一家铸币局生产，不能再像过去一样在全部三家铸币局打造，防止收藏爱好者为集齐套装被迫购买三枚仅有铸币标记不同的硬币（各铸币局会在硬币上采用不同的铸币标记）。[6]海湾大桥半美元的授权法案中就有这项规定[7]，还要求销售获利用于庆典活动[8]。与其他大部分美国早期纪念币用于周年纪念不同，发行旧金山－奥克兰海湾大桥半美元的目的和巴拿马－太平洋纪念币一样，是为了庆祝当时的工程成就。[9]


旧金山－奥克兰海湾大桥和耶尔巴布埃纳岛
1936年4月10日，加利福尼亚州联邦参议员海勒姆·约翰逊向参议院递交法案，建议发行半美元纪念币，庆祝海湾大桥落成。不过参议院当天正忙于审理佛罗里达州联邦法官霍尔斯特德·洛克伍德·里特（Halsted L. Ritter）弹劾案[10]，没有马上把约翰逊的法案转交银行和货币委员会审核。[11]银行和货币委员会审核法案后向参议院回报，建议通过法案，同时提议将今后所有硬币（包括再度授权的币种）的最小发行量从五千提高到2.5万。1936年6月1日，参议院审议的纪念币法案有六项，其中有包括海湾大桥半美元在内的四项通过，没有议员提问或反对，另外两项延后再议。[12]

1936年4月21日，加利福尼亚州联邦众议员阿尔伯特·爱德华·卡特（Albert E. Carter）向众议院递交法案，建议发行纪念币庆祝旧金山湾区新桥落成（包括金门大桥和海湾大桥），法案随后转交铸币和度量衡委员会审议[13]。4月23日，密苏里州议员约翰·约瑟夫·科克伦（John J. Cochran）回报众议院建议通过法案[14]。1936年5月27日，科克伦提请众议院审议法案。宾夕法尼亚州共和党议员罗伯特·弗莱明·里奇（Robert F. Rich）表示，这已经是今年（众议院）审核的第35部铸币法案，不如“咱们在这款硬币一面刻上民主党全国委员会委员法利先生的头像，另一面刻上纽约市（民主党）委员会委员法利先生（同一人）的头像，这样不管你怎么抛，硬币上永远都是法利先生。”[15]不过里奇没有投票反对，也没有其他议员提问，法案顺利通过[16]。

6月18日，科克伦告知众议院，两院已各自通过不同法案授权发行纪念币庆祝湾区新桥落成，建议众议院审议参议院通过的版本。最终众议院通过参议院法案，没有议员提问，原本众议院通过的法案搁置。[17]1936年6月26日，经富兰克林·德拉诺·罗斯福总统签字，授权发行二十万枚半美元纪念币庆祝海湾大桥建成的法案成为法律正式生效。[18]此外，国会还曾审核建议发行纪念币庆祝金门大桥落成的法案，但最终没有通过[19]。


灰熊
据钱币学作家唐·塔克西（Don Taxay）推测，罗斯福总统签署法案后，海湾大桥半美元的前期准备工作应该很快就开始了。1936年7月20日，旧金山市民庆典委员会主席弗兰克·罗伯茨·黑文纳（Franck R. Havenner）致信美国铸币局助理局长玛丽·玛格丽特·奥赖利，询问新币设计和投产的程序问题，同时附上纪念币设计师雅克·施尼尔（Jacques Schnier）的资料和入选设计方案的照片。[20]奥赖利将信转交美国美术委员会，根据沃伦·盖玛利尔·哈定总统1921年签署的行政命令，该组织负责为包括硬币在内的各种公共美术品提供设计建议[21]。7月31日，美术委员会主席查尔斯·摩尔（Charles Moore）给黑文纳去信转述委员会委员、雕塑家李·劳列（Lee Lawrie）的建议：把设计方案中的字母加大[22]。

设计师完成纪念币的石膏模型后，美术委员会于9月15日会晤，根据模型照片审核设计方案。摩尔在写给奥赖利的信中表示，灰熊的鼻子应该不是这个样子，并附上照片供施尼尔修改设计时参考。原有设计方案将格言“E PLURIBUS UNUM”（“合众为一”）和“IN GOD WE TRUST”（“我们信仰上帝”）分别放在灰熊左右两侧，但美术委员会委员约翰·豪威尔斯（John M. Howells）认为右侧的“IN GOD WE TRUST”位置不合适。接下来各方经过多次信件往来依然未能确定到底应该把“IN GOD WE TRUST”放在什么地方，最终黑文纳在发给铸币局的电报中指出，过去发行的多款纪念币上要么没有“E PLURIBUS UNUM”，要么没有“LIBERTY”（“自由”），所以他建议把灰熊左边的“E PLURIBUS UNUM”替换成“IN GOD WE TRUST”。奥赖利接受他的建议，经施尼尔修改，设计方案先后获美术委员会和财政部认可。[23]接下来，石膏模型由位于纽约的奖章用品公司（Medallic Art Company）缩制成硬币大小的出币毂[24]。

钱币学作家安东尼·斯沃泰克（Anthony Swiatek）和沃尔特·布林（Walter Breen）表示，判断海湾大桥半美元到底哪一面是正面基本靠猜，之所以把灰熊这边视为正面只是尊重小阿利·斯拉伯（Arlie Slabaugh, Jr.）和唐·塔克西这些先辈的意见[25]。纪念币发行时，正面的灰熊引来批评，称设计图案是以在金门公园笼子里住了26年的灰熊“君主二世”（Monarch II）为模特儿，这么一头熊根本不适合代表自由，而“Liberty”（“自由”）一词偏偏就刻灰熊的脚下[25]。对此昆汀·戴维·鲍尔斯（Q. David Bowers）在纪念币主题著作中表示，施尼尔曾造访旧金山和奥克兰的动物园观察多种动物，半美元上的灰熊是这些动物的综合体[26]。塔克西指出，艺术家经常用灰熊代表加利福尼亚州，在他看来，施尼尔的创作“异常成功”[27]。硬币正面还有四颗五角星，其中熊的左侧一颗，右侧三颗，这些星星并没有象征意义，而且施尼尔最初的草图上也没有[28]。代表旧金山铸币局的铸币标记“S”位于灰熊前肢左侧，设计师的姓名首字母缩写“JS”在灰熊右边[25]。


旧金山渡轮大厦，远处背景是海湾大桥。
纪念币另一面是旧金山视角的海湾大桥，并有位于内河码头的渡轮大厦为前景。大桥中段是海湾内的耶尔巴布埃纳岛（Yerba Buena Island），远处还可以看见东湾（East Bay）的伯克利山（Berkeley Hills），海湾内有渡轮和远洋邮轮各一艘。[29]连接耶尔巴布埃纳岛的金银岛属人工建筑，当时尚未建成，所以没有出现在硬币上[25]。此外，图案周围还有桥梁全名“SAN FRANCISCO–OAKLAND BAY BRIDGE”（“旧金山－奥克兰海湾大桥”）和铸造年份“1936”环绕[28]。这一面的设计较为复杂，完全没有平整区域[26]。

钱币学家斯图尔特·莫舍（Stuart Mosher）在1940年发行的纪念币主题著作中记录下有关“君主二世”的争议，觉得施尼尔对灰熊的设计构想同加利福尼亚州钻禧纪念半美元（1925年发行）类似，不过在他看来，对于海湾大桥半美元来说，灰熊不及同另一面的桥梁设计重要[26]。斯沃泰克则在著作中称赞这款半美元很“可爱”[30]。美术史学家科尼利厄斯·弗缪尔（Cornelius Vermeule）在1971年出版的美国钱币和奖章主题著作中正面评价海湾大桥半美元，称没有其他任何一款半美元纪念币会用这么大的尺寸来描绘动物或景观[31]。他还表示，自从尼禄在古罗马硬币塞斯特斯上采用奥斯提亚港口图案以来，在硬币上展示港口全貌一直是充满诱惑的钱币设计主题。在他看来，施尼尔以宏大视角展示旧金山至奥克兰间景观的做法，可以同十六、十七世纪钱币和奖章上采用地理图案相提并论。这样的设计充满勇气，无论是在审美还是艺术成就角度都值得赞颂。弗缪尔认为，（硬币上的）灰熊是多种动物（主要是熊）的集合体，它同毛发传达的力量感结合，令人感到凄美进而产生同情。[32]


乔·莫拉设计的加利福尼亚州钻禧纪念半美元（1925年发行）上同样刻有灰熊
1936年11月，旧金山铸币局共铸造十万零55枚海湾大桥半美元，其中55枚转送费城铸币局保留，等待来年化验委员会的年度检测[33]。虽然这些纪念币完全相同，但专门用于展示的还是最早出产的两百枚。这两百枚中又有22枚始终没用上，之后附上证书卖给收藏爱好者。[34]国会授权的发行量是二十万枚，实际生产数量只占一半，钱币学作家小阿利·斯拉伯认为此举非常明智，因为收藏爱好者和投资者购买纪念币是为了获利，发行量高的硬币显然不能入他们法眼。旧金山－奥克兰海湾大桥于1936年11月12日揭幕，庆祝活动共持续三天[35]，但纪念币姗姗来迟，通车约一周后才开始销售。硬币分销由人称旧金山清算所协会的多家银行负责，人们也可以向庆典活动组织方位于市场街的办事处邮购，零售价1.65美元，可能有十美分或更多的折扣[33]。大桥入口附近搭有销售摊位，消费者无需下车就能买到[30]，另有来源称大桥的收费站也在出售[33]。无论如何，旧金山－奥克兰海湾大桥半美元都是美国历史上第一种买家无需下车就能直接在路上购买的纪念币[18]。

1937年1月下旬，纪念币发售委员会财务主管劳伦斯·贾尼尼（Lawrence M. Giannini）宣布，海湾大桥半美元将在2月15日后停售，没卖出的会退回铸币局熔毁[36]。此时销售工作已陷入僵局，最终卖出的共有7万1369枚，剩下的2万8631枚送回铸币局熔毁。[30]

1940年，海湾大桥半美元的市场价格依然只有1.5美元，此后才逐渐升值，到1980年美国再度兴起纪念币热潮时一度涨至240美元。1990年，这款半美元的市场价格在120至560美元之间，具体视成色而定。[37]根据理查德·约曼（Richard S. Yeoman）2018年版的《美国钱币指南手册》（A Guide Book of United States Coins），如今这款纪念币视成色而定，价值在145至340美元之间[38]。2004年，一枚成色根据谢尔顿硬币分级标准判定为基本完美的样币以21850美元高价成交[39]。

1986年，为纪念海湾大桥半美元发行五十周年，一千枚采用卡槽和塑料密封包装、并附编号及施尼尔签名的纪念币开始面向钱币经销商发售[24][30]，其中的硬币都是之前从公开市场上购买，而非过去未卖出的存货[18]。